.TH TRUTHBYTE 1 "April 2025" "TruthByte 2.0-1" "File Hash Verifier"

.SH NAME
truthbyte \- a CLI tool to verify file integrity using hash algorithms

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B truthbyte
[\fIoptions\fR] \fB<path>\fR [\fB<hash>\fR]
.br
.B truthbyte
\fB-a\fR \fI<algorithm>\fR \fB<file_path>\fR \fB<expected_hash>\fR
.br
.B truthbyte
\fB-a\fR \fI<algorithm>\fR [\fB-r\fR|\fB--recursive\fR] [\fB-v\fR|\fB--verify-from\fR \fI<hash_file>\fR] \fB<directory_path>\fR
.br
.B truthbyte --help
.br
.B truthbyte --version

.SH DESCRIPTION
TruthByte verifies file integrity by calculating and comparing hash values. It supports both 
single file verification against a provided hash and directory-based verification using a hash file.
For directories, it can process files recursively (including subdirectories) and output detailed 
verification reports.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-a <algorithm>
Specify hash algorithm. Supported values: \fBsha256\fR, \fBsha1\fR, \fBsha512\fR, \fBmd5\fR

.TP
.B \-r, --recursive
Process directories recursively (include subdirectories)

.TP
.B \-v, --verify-from <file>
Read expected hashes from specified file when verifying directories

.TP
.B \-o, --output <file>
Output verification results to a text file (must have .txt extension)

.TP
.B \-h, --help
Display help and usage information

.TP
.B --version
Display the current version of TruthByte

.TP
.B --upgrade
Placeholder for future upgrade functionality (not implemented yet)

.SH FILE FORMAT
TruthByte supports hash files in standard formats with one entry per line:

.B <hash> <filename>
.br
or
.br
.B <filename> <hash>

Example:
.nf
61d034473102d1bee8c67fe7f917da99400f342c167d1b470e385e4c10339b27 file.iso
8d8d1d4aad5f7448f037f386387a75b077f8abcb09abdff5d70f405d91cb429f document.pdf
.fi

Comments (lines starting with #) and empty lines are ignored.

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success - All verified files matched their expected hashes
.TP
.B 1
Error - Hash mismatch detected or other error occurred
.TP
.B 2
Warning - No files were checked

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
.B Verify a single file:
.nf
truthbyte -a sha256 ~/Downloads/ubuntu.iso abc123def456...
.fi

.TP
.B Verify files in a directory:
.nf
truthbyte -a md5 -v hashes.md5 ~/Downloads/
.fi

.TP
.B Recursively verify files and save results:
.nf
truthbyte -a sha256 -r --verify-from hashes.sha256 ~/Projects/ -o verification.txt
.fi

.TP
.B Check program version:
.nf
truthbyte --version
.fi

.SH NOTES
When verifying directories, TruthByte attempts to match filenames from the hash file with files in the directory.
For recursive mode, it supports both full paths and basenames.

TruthByte provides color-coded output for easy status identification (green for matches, red for mismatches).

.SH AUTHOR
TruthByte Developers

.SH SEE ALSO
sha256sum(1), md5sum(1), sha1sum(1), sha512sum(1)